there are copies that have the drawings
as well okay so you should have 343
pages and how and how many drawings are
there Susan you have them how many
drawings are at the back of your book
there
are four four four droids if you don't
have it check before 257 I just found
mine floating in the middle
oh oh yeah those that's them right oh
these the the origin the way
okay those you might want to put those
at the back of your book that's where
they supposed to
be PES too oh you did well that's
good 14 so that's that looks like
everybody so have 14 people so that's
that's a good
size okay so I'm going to lecture for a
while and then uh what you should have
read today
was the preface of the thing that you
picked up from nman Cofe and the first
chapter which is called uh maps of
experience and
uh in terms of this
book you should be reading it now and
also for the next class we'll we'll go
over this in some detail
too
so so I'll start if you have any
questions
feel free to ask them I'll tryy to leave
at least half an hour at the end open
for General discussion uh and really
like you know feel free to to stop me at
any point if what I'm saying doesn't
make any sense or if you have some
relevant Associated
issue okay
now the first thing we have to figure
out basically is what it is that we're
talking about in this course and uh
that's so we have to establish the
domain of inquiry that's basically the
the purpose of today's lecture
um the reason I got interested in this
sort of thing as I mentioned to you last
week was because I interested in
figuring out why people are motivated to
commit acts of aggression really
atrocious acts of aggression because
that's the kind I'm really interested in
in defense of their of their belief
systems your probably best if you can
pull somewhere over there because then
you get a closer view of the so if you
guys could just cram together a bit if
you would maybe
we get get a few more people in
here okay once again does everybody here
have a
syllabus okay and does everybody have
this
book okay is there anybody that wants
this book
right
okay just have to write your name your
ID
called map of meeting is available at
nman copy and uh they not binding it no
they're yeah if you talk to the people
that have a clue they're binding you
because people have been getting bound
copies and if you don't get a bound copy
tell them it's supposed to be bound okay
because you don't want to pack that
thing around Unbound they didn't even
have any when I went yesterday yeah I
know they're doing them on a order only
basis now yeah although I ordered eight
more of them so they told me yesterday
that there had been 45 copies that were
pre-ordered and guaranteed and they were
all gone is that is that the case yeah
well I didn't expect to get rid of 45
copies so but did you get one they
didn't have any I ordered one yeah
that's what they're doing now so are
there 45 people in the class no I also
teach it at the extension school oh so
that's that's the Reas okay okay so
we're done with procedural issues
theoretically okay okay well I'll
reverse myself here again okay so what
we're going to talk about today uh
is I'll start the story again I got
interested in what I'm going to teach
you about because I was interested in
looking at motivation for social
conflict maybe I can get you shut the
door there you would don't disturb the
whole
floor that must be Ellen langers is back
here I'll okay
okay with regards to the videotape if
you can ignore it that would be best
there's no real purpose to it I want the
videotape so it's not like uh you're
going to be your comments are going to
be widely shown to anyone so so try just
not to worry about
it all
right when I started giving some
consideration to the problem of
motivation for social conflict
um so I was interested in why people
become rigid in their ideological
identifications and in their cultural
identities and I was interested in
really why individuals do that so I
started to get interested in what role
social identity plays in information
processing which is hence the title of
this course which is kind of wordy and
and useless but the thing is everyone
knows that we have social identities and
ideological identities they're religious
they're cultur they're intellectual
whatever but nobody's really paid much
attention to studying how the
representations of that cultural
identity um alter the manner in which we
we feel emotion which in which we
perceive and by which we act I'm
interested in how our internal
representations of our culture modulate
our emotional expression that's the best
way to put it say you know your brain
basically is programmed as you're
socialized that's what socialization is
for and obviously social a that instills
cultural identity and equally obviously
the process of socialization that leads
to cultural identity must have some
impact on the way you think and
obviously equally that on the way that
your mind functions and the way that
your brain functions and see North
American
neuropsychologists have been loathed to
give any consideration to this sort of
notion to think that cultural
Transformations might have some direct
impact on physiological functioning but
um the Russians by contrast has been a
central tenant of their neur
neuropsychological theories basically
since since day one this is particularly
true with regards to Alexander Lura and
uh uh what's his name vski now you can
think about this it's quite obvious if
you think about it uh for a second with
regards to something like the the
capacity to read silently now it is the
case that well this is a relatively new
talent I mean literacy is a new Talent
right most people weren't able to read
500 years ago it's only only been 500
years and only for a little bit of that
that the capacity to read has been
widespread and the capacity to read
silently is a relatively a new
development in human history now it's a
peculiar thing if you think about it but
nonetheless the capacity to read
silently localizes to a specific part of
the brain which is to say it's as if you
have a part of the brain that's evolved
for that purpose it's the same place in
everybody more or less there are
individual variations there are
differences when people are lateralized
differently but all that aside if you
learn to silent read there's a part of
your brain that specializes for that and
it's pretty much the same place in
everyone and it wasn't there or it
wasn't doing that sort of activity 2,000
years ago in fact I read at one point I
don't know where the reference to this
is like so many things that I make
reference to but I read at one point
that people thought Julius Caesar was a
magician in part I mean he was obviously
a remarkable person but in part because
he could read silently he he didn't have
to read aloud so it wasn't just reading
that was remarkable it was being able to
read without talking anyways the point
of all this is
that your brain this is L's view of the
brain fundamentally is your brain is an
organ that produces sub organs
culturally specific suborgan that's its
that's its remarkable capacity is that
it can generate
new modules that are specialized for
certain tasks as a consequence of
environmental programming well this is
an interesting sort of notion which is
to say that at some level of
physiological analysis at least your
culture determines how your brain works
now it's very plastic you know your
brain's very plastic when you're a child
you can sustain immense amounts of
cortical damage in childhood and still
Grow Up Normally for for example if
you're very very epileptic as a child
sometimes what surgeons will do is take
out a whole hemisphere a whole right
hemisphere gone and children who have
hemispherectomies if they're done young
enough still grow up to be relatively
normal quite normal in fact and there
are other cases too where people are
hydropic which basically means that
their
ventricles don't vent properly um and
cerebral spinal fluid builds up in the
skull these people often have skulls
that are slightly larger than normal not
necessarily obvious but but still the
case and they end up with a a skull
that's essentially full of liquid with a
very very thin layer of brain tissue
around this this ball of liquid and uh
are a number of case reports of people
who have like 5% of the cortical tissue
intact who have high functioning
intelligence is normal personality so
point is you're especially the higher
cortical levels of your brain are very
very functionally flexible in childhood
now by the time you're an adult you know
the pattern changes a little bit kind of
looks like your brain dies into its
adult configuration and that's an
interesting way to look at it which is
to say you have way more neurons than
you need especially right before you're
born and uh environment prunes your
brain down to its adult
configuration
so although of course you develop
connections as well but you lose a lot
of neurons
so uh and by the time you're an adult
your brain is nowhere near as flexible
as it was when you were a child and if
you sustain damage to certain parts of
your brain that are already specialized
well you know then you have the damage
and you can work around it and all that
but it can still be really
permanent oh question so that's sort of
um the marking in it's yeah that's right
that's
comment because it the brain adapts
whereas the body yeah that's a great
comment you know and if you start
thinking about that it has really
revolutionary implication so you can say
for example if I have an idea that's
really radical and say in a sense that
changes the configuration of my cortex I
can transmit that maybe not to you maybe
your brain is already fixed so to speak
but down the generations and alter the
structure of brains henceforth so you
could say well ideas can spread
throughout a population that way that's
a lamarian spread but even more
interestingly I think is and this is
speculative of course but let's say that
um there are certain types of
Revolutions in thought that are actually
the consequences of biological mutations
so you could say that well you're a
particularly odd sort of person from the
genetic perspective and as a consequence
you think in a very very unique manner
but the thing that's so interesting is
that if you can still communicate those
thoughts then the effect of that genetic
mutation can be transmitted throughout
the population without any biological
alteration at the Gen gentic level at
all so that's that's really something
something that's interesting because it
means that the consequence of genetic
mutations on cognition can spread
throughout the population as fast as
communication can move so that's yeah
and the lamaran does everybody know what
lamaran transmission is well Lamar was
the character who thought that uh the
reason that that you could AC you could
transmit acquired characteristics so the
reason giraffes have long necks is
because they kept trying to stretch
their necks basically and so and they
transmitted the capacity to do the
stretching to their offspring so you
could transmit acquired characteristics
down the genetic line now there's no you
can't do that that's wrong but that's
what Lamar thought but he wasn't
completely wrong because there is that
is how this sort of transmission works
it's non- gentically mediated
accumulation of biological resources so
that's very interesting so yeah that's a
good comment okay
anyways so uh that's kind of that's
that's some of the background of why I'm
interested in in the neuros psychology
of culture and if you're interested in
that sort of thing you want to read thei
and you want to read Lura um because the
Russians are are really interested in
the effect of culture on cognition and
the regulation of emotion and as far as
I'm concerned like for a long time they
were five decades ahead of North America
and Europe in terms of exploring this
sort of thing um I'm not exactly sure
why that is but but that is the
case so
okay well the first thing that I started
to started to realize I guess this this
is sort of an emergent realization it
wasn't something that happened early on
when I was trying to develop these ideas
but it became a way of making them
clearer and I started giving some
consideration I guess to the old
philosophical distinction between fact
and value you
know value and you could say value
that's kind in the domain of of what
should
be and uh or
ethics and uh fact well that's kind of
in the domain of what actually is or
what or what was or what could be you
know taking the past present and future
into consideration it's long been known
in philosophical circles that you can't
make any you can't draw any conclusions
about what should be what ought to be
from an analysis of what is which is to
say you can't derive an ought from an is
and there's some sort of divide there
and you can sort of think of this um
just knowing the particulars of a
situation doesn't mean that you know how
to act there and I think that's really
where the division takes place which is
to say that coming up with a description
of the characteristics of a place like
let's say you're from a lower working
class family and You by some Misfortune
you have to go to a uh a TX
cedo ball where there'll be nothing but
rich people you don't really know how to
act you know you can describe the
circumstances you basically know what it
is that you're going to encounter but
that doesn't tell you anything at all
about how it is that you should conduct
yourself and the other thing that's kind
of interesting about that is that how
you should conduct yourself this ties in
directly to what we're going to talk
about today depends on what aim you want
to or what goal you want to pursue you
know so you have to decide that a
priority if you're going to go to this
party you can say well I don't like
people like that anyways they're all
capitalist uh exploiters and they
deserve my contempt and so I'll go there
and act miserably and make everyone
dislike me and that'll be perfectly fine
and that's an that's an ought as far as
you're concerned that's a moral
injunction and if you accept that line
of reasoning you're going to act one way
and if your other line of reasoning is
well maybe I have something to learn in
this situation I'll just shut up and
watch then what constitutes the ought
under those circumstances is something
completely different so you know you can
switch around what the should be is by
determining where it is that you want to
go that's obviously not something you
can do with facts like whether you want
to be light or whether you want to be
hostile nothing to do with the like the
the objective aspects of the situation
so now there's a real so that's a that's
a problem so uh that's sort of the
background so let's go into
this
now we all know that people have belief
systems but we don't really know as far
as I can tell what that means it's
like to have a belief
system this analysis sort of suggests
that there isn't such thing as there is
no such thing as a belief system is the
at the very minimum of belief system is
composed of two elements which is your
description of how the world is from the
factual perspective and also your
description of how the world should be
or you could say your interpretation of
the reality of phenomena and also your
interpretation of how you should act
with regards to those phenomena so at
the very least when you're talking
beliefs you're talking about something
that has two constituent
elements now this has been known for a
long time now it strikes me that there's
a a real there's a an analogous division
in human cognition between fact and
value that you might describe as the
division
between
science and meth
we don't really fight with people over
what things are from the scientific
perspective and that's I think in part
because unless you're ID emotionally
identified with your particular Theory
which basically means unless you're you
imbued your theory with dreams of career
for example or dreams of prestige or
whatever one one scientific theory is
pretty much as good as the next which is
to say that from the scientific
perspective all facts are equivalent
they don't have any intrinsic emotional
significance you're supposed to be
objective with regards to your
description of the world we don't really
have to fight about what the world is
from a scientific
perspective um that's partly because
there's not so much emotion involved in
it although that happens sometimes
that's more of a contamination than
something Central to the scientific
Enterprise people are always trying to
get rid of that you don't mess around
with your data to make it turn out the
way you wanted to because the way you
want things to turn out has nothing to
do with the scientific Enterprise at
least in
part the other thing is from the
scientific perspective is we have a
method of solving arguments in the
scientific world that's right you can
put whatever your competing hypothesis
are about the nature of things to ATT
test and in a sense if you can't do that
what you're talking about is probably
not scientific at all or that's what
some people think at the very least so
first of all there's not a lot of
emotion entangled in the scientific
Viewpoint second second of all if there
is a problem a dispute we have a very
very formalized mechanism for working it
out and people are usually willing to
abide by that because well it works it's
it it's demonstrated its utility from
the pragmatic perspective plus it's
comprehensible you can outline all the
rules I mean we really have a strategy
for that you don't even have to be very
bright in scientist all you have to do
is be very thorough and follow the rules
this is uh made explicit the scientific
procedure that happened about 500 years
ago or thereabouts we know how to
we know how to come up with a
description of the world from the
sensory perspective that everyone can
agree about more or
less
okay that isn't what we fight with
people over
over what's important to us is not what
things are so much as what they mean and
so then the question is well in a sense
what does meaning mean and that's much
the same as asking what is an emotion or
what is a motivational state or what is
Drive State these things have have
proved very difficult to nail down in
the past what's the meaning of
meaning but well I'm going to give you a
provisional definition and that is that
the meaning of something is its
implication for
behavior and I mean that literally right
and behavior is the act of propelling
your body through space that's that's at
least one dimension of
meaning there are more profound levels
of meaning you could also say something
is Meaningful if it has
implications for the schema that you use
to generate behaviors that's a more
profound piece of information something
that's more profoundly meaningful
because then a phenomena an event that
occurs can change your reaction to whole
classes of events that's a really
meaningful phenomena but we're not going
to discuss that so much today we'll just
stick with the with the simple
definition of meaning which is
implication for behavior and well I give
an example in the chapter that you were
to read today about a
girl little girl 3 years old or whatever
she's uh exploring her
environment and we tend to think that
when someone's exploring their
environment what they're trying to do is
map the sensory properties of that which
surrounds them mean that's how we think
so the girl in the example I used well
what she's wandering around touching
things and poking about using all the
exploratory tools that she has at her
disposal some of which she thinks up and
some of which she copies and she
approaches an antique table and on top
of the table there's a very fragile
green glass antique vase and she reaches
up to touch it in the course of her
exploratory activity and her mother
immediately shrieks no don't touch that
comes over and grabs her hand and pulls
it back and sits the girl down and says
that's not something for you to
touch well you
see the girl has just discovered
something about what that thing is from
the motivational perspective which is to
say well you can view that object as
something that has sensory uh properties
but you can also view it as something
that has motivational significance and
the motivational significance in this
case for that child is ambivalent
because the thing is interesting it's
green and it's shining it draws the
exploratory tendency out of the child
she wants to approach it but it's also
something that's linked with punishment
so that's an ambivalent phenomena and
much of what we do when we map our
environments is map them for
motivational significance now because
we're so good at being scientists or we
have become so good at being scientists
for the last 500 years or so we tend to
think that when we map the environment
what we're mapping it for is its sensory
properties but as far as I can first of
all you think about it animals are not
scientists so whatever they're doing is
not akin to science except in it's more
primitive in its more primitive form
whatever animals are doing is more like
whatever it was that we were doing
before we became scientists so you can
say well what what it was that we were
doing whatever that was 150,000 years
ago or 250,000 years ago we still
managed to M the environments because we
could live in them and obviously we're
all still here so our relatives were
pretty good at or our ancestors were
pretty good at doing that we weren't
doing it from the scientific perspective
we are doing something
else what we're doing is mapping the
environment for implications for
Behavior you see when you you you really
want to think about this good and hard
because if you think about it it's it'll
start changing the way you view the
world because it answers some strange
questions that are otherwise difficult
to answer
like why do you stop asking questions
about things you know from the
scientific perspective that you're
surrounded by a surfite of mysteries
there's nothing you comprehend
absolutely in your field of experience
there's more questions about the factual
nature of things wherever you look but
sometimes you ask questions and
sometimes you don't you might ask what
you know what is it that stops Us in any
given
circumstance you can't answer that if
you start thinking about how it is that
people think scientifically you can only
answer it if you start thinking about
how it is that people think from the
motivational persp perspective because
can tell you that you'll stop asking
questions say about like I don't know
any of you very well but at at least at
the moment the fact that I don't know
you very well isn't compelling me to do
a tremendous amount of exploration
because I know you well enough so that I
can predict your behavior in this
circumstance which is to say that I have
a very detailed Vision in my mind of
where this next two hours is going to go
in terms of the whole 2hour period And
every sort of subtemporal aspect of that
down to the immediate present and as
long as none of you violate my
presuppositions I don't have to ask any
questions about you because I've got you
m and likewise for me as long as things
go according to your predictions you
know the world and the thing you're
trying to predict is the the effect that
your behavior has on phenomena in terms
of motivation so
anyways so you can just sort of keep
that in mind so look as far as I'm
concerned we think two different ways
one way is being formalized and that's
the scientific way and what the
scientific Enterprise is is the attempt
to come up with an accurate description
of the sensory properties of phenomena
in so far as those are collectively
apprehensible which is to say that we
want to know what things are from the
sensory perspective and we engage in a a
communicative exercise to determine that
because if I want to figure out what
this is from the scientific perspective
it's much more
effective if I can have a thousand
people working on it all at once and
we're all communicating our knowledge
and we can build up a very detailed
picture of the thing but the only reason
we want to do that is so that we can
track the motivational significance of
things more accurately just to say once
again why does an animal care if
something is green rather than red well
it may be because being able to
discriminate colors finely more finely
means more accurate mapping of the
motivational motivational relevance
which is to say that if you can only see
in black and white for
example if something that's the same Hue
red is poison as something green well
you've had it because you can't
distinguish them if you can only see
black and white now if you can see color
which means you can make a finer level
of sensory discrimination you can keep
better track of where the good things
are where the bad things aren't and as
far as I'm concerned that's really why
we do science in final analysis when you
get because you got to ask what's the
motivation you know for doing all these
weird things and looking at fruit flies
etc etc we want to keep track of where
the motivational significances of things
are and we can do that better by making
finer and finer discriminations between
things because we can say well this
thing is that and this thing is that and
it's useful to be able to do that um
what I I understand the difference
between interest and value when when a
cat may may value the food that he's
about to eat but is not necessarily
interested in it um B silly places value
on it so I don't understand where how
that works out
[Music]
in well things that are we are
interested in things that have value so
but not all things that have value have
interest that's
well isn't a food a
biological yeah so is so is novelty
though well the thing about food is that
it's interesting if you're food deprived
and it's not if you're not so it depends
on your it depends on your current state
of interpretation so you can never
identify anything as having interest as
an intrinsic aspect of that thing that's
something we'll cover in more detail too
but if something is valuable to you
you're interested in whether the
veillance is positive or negative now
that interest can fluctuate I mean you
and when you ask a question like that
too you want to make sure that you
you've discriminated in your own mind
the difference between the two terms
that you're using so there's obviously
some in overlap between interest and
value it strikes me that probably what
you're referring to is that um things
that have no specified biological
significance but that are unpredictable
are
interesting whereas something like food
is valuable so you might be able to say
that interest is the more General
phenomena of value before it's being
discriminated into sub
components okay because if something
unexpected happens it attracts your
interest which means that you value it
but you have no determination of the
value yet you can only say here is
something that I didn't predict and then
the purpose of exploration is to is to
put it into the appropriate boxes that's
something that you want to you want to
give some consideration to because
that's like in a sense that's one of the
most fundamental things that I want you
to to to learn is that when we classify
things using exploration we're not
attributing meaning to something that
has a neutral background
we're taking something that has a very
broad range of non-specific meaning and
restricting it to something
specific okay so for example I'll make
it more concrete you take a rat by the
tail and you drop them into a new cage
well interest is everywhere it's no
specific the rat's going to sit there
like this first of all it's going to be
paralyzed it doesn't move its motor
systems are inhibited by its anxiety
system it is not moving and the reason
it's not moving well the rat doesn't
know this but this is what we would
presume the reason it's not moving is
because in novel territory there may be
a predator and if you don't move then
Predators can't see you so the rat sits
there like this and maybe it'll sniff a
little bit because that doesn't draw any
attention to itself and if nothing
happens that kills it slowly it starts
to unwind a little bit and then it's the
systems that mediate curiosity which are
the incentive reward systems technically
start driving the rat around and the rat
will explore and what it's trying to do
is reduce the non-specific value of the
novel environment to something specified
which which you could say in a sense is
there anything here that will hurt me so
it's looking for punishments it's
actually looking to avoid them but wants
to know where the hell they are is there
anything here that will make me anxious
which is to say is there anything here
that signifies that the punishment is
likely is there anything here that I can
eat or that will otherwise satisfy one
of my consumatory requirements or is
there anything here that will signify
the presence of something that will
satisfy my consumatory requirements
those are four categories
punishment satisfaction threat and hope
basically and what the rout is trying to
do is to restrict the indeterminate
significance of the novel circumstance
to a discriminate category which is to
say it wants to know exactly where all
the things that have determinant value
or located mostly it's going to map
nothing because that's the alternative
categories like no relevance and most of
the things around you are mapped into
that box like you think about the
reactions in this room most of the
phenomena in this room are not
attracting your attention and I mean you
can you can divert your attention to
them but you like those things those are
irrelevant you know had I not pointed
them out perhaps you'd remember they
were there perhaps you wouldn't they
signify nothing from the motivational
perspective so you've mapped them as
irrelevant and most of the things you
map are mapped as irrelevant that is how
they started out started out as
novel that's the fundamental that's the
opening
position anyways
[Applause]
there's a historical
progression I
guess say for the sake of
argument the scientific method was
established more or less 500 years ago
say well it was at that point where our
our mythological models of reality and
our scientific models split
now I'm going to ask you to swallow a
presupposition for the time being in
that presupposition is that talent
because it'll take me a while to explain
the logic behind
it look you know how you get scientific
information it's basically taught to you
explicitly and you can read experiments
and you read theories and so on you it's
part of explicit
education but how you pick up knowledge
of how to act well that's not quite as
explicit it's not as easy to figure out
I mean obviously you model we know that
children take up a lot of information by
modeling Behavior which is basically
means if they copy adults and that
basically means they watch adults act
move their bodies through space and they
duplicate those patterns of action and
they generalize from them so that's one
way behavioral wisdom is transmitted
some of it's explicit as well at least
in terms of the receipt of rewards and
punishments because parents will
modulate their children's Behavior by
engaging in motivationally significant
interactions with them at least that's
what you should do if you're a parent
that's your primary responsibility in a
sense so that's what we mean when we say
that you're paying attention to someone
it basically means that you're
modulating their behavior with your
behavior with your emotions so like a
child will monitor or parent will
monitor his child and react positively
when something that the parent wants to
happen happens and negatively when
something happens that the parent
doesn't want to happen so the child's
behavior is well that's just classical
reinforcement Theory basically you
exchange rewards and punishments and
threats and promises and modulate
behavior we do that all the time in our
interpersonal interactions um that's
part of the reason why people with
personality disorders can sort of have
an uncanny effect on you which is to say
that if you're personality disordered
you have a really potent expectation
about how someone else will behave
usually like a son of a
fundamentally and if someone with a
personality disorder encounters someone
who doesn't act like that they're a
challenge to their belief system and
people with personality disorders are
extremely good at turning everyone they
meet into the same person that they
already met and they do that I think by
exchanging very very subtle covert
reinforcements which is to say you're
engaged with me I have a personality
disorder every time you act properly
I'll ignore you or say something
contemptuous or look away or do
something quite subtle and every time
you act like a miserable bastard which
is basically what I expect I'll at least
pay some attention and possibly even
reinforce you covertly and you'll find
if you get close to me that you it's
almost like you've being distorted by a
gravitational field as your behavior
starts getting pulled in strange
directions and we do that to each other
all the time and one of the things you
might consider is
well our societies are very large and
we're all engaged in these patterns of
mutually modifying interactions and
something emerges from that that's
stable and I guess I would say that the
things I'm going to teach you about
mythology are the things that I view as
stable emerging properties from from
centuries of reciprocal interaction so
if we're engaged in some Pursuit you're
going to modify me and I'm going to
modify you and neither of us really know
precisely what that means because we're
not conscious of all the reasons that we
do everything and that's I mean it's bad
enough if there's only two of us but if
there's like 50 of us well then you can
imagine that calculating all the
permutations of the interactions becomes
virtually impossible the point is we
will settle into some sort of stable
configuration or or not or will all like
disappear those are the options and uh
human societies do still settle into
stable configurations and we don't
really understand how that happens but
we
have developed the ability to describe
those configurations without
understanding them and I think that
makes up a big part of Mythology so
myths are the stories we tell ourselves
about how we behave when we don't know
how it is that we behave or even why so
want to file that under you know things
to consider in the in the future
let's go
back excuse me was there some connection
between what you the distinction you
were just making in the declarative and
non- declarative memory that one of the
pieces talks about absolutely yeah we'll
disc we'll discuss that some detail I
think there is so you have these three
separate memory systems one of them is
non non declarative which basically it's
non-representational that's the
procedural system procedural memory
governs your motor output if it's
habitual fundamentally that's right you
use your procedural memory to walk with
because walking is way too complicated
to do as a consequence of representation
it's like it's such a complex well you
can't think about how to walk it's a
habit it's a skill it's like if you play
the piano if you know a piece off by
hard as soon as you think about it well
your fingers stumble over themselves
because it's too complicated to think
about you can't handle all that
information in your your active
conscience anyways we've coded a lot of
Behavioral information in our procedural
systems it's not it's not declarative
it's not representational it's there
well I think part of what a story is is
it is the representation of the patterns
of behavior that are coded in the
procedural systems so you see like when
we're engaged in any sort of interaction
you and I are both modifying the
contents of our procedural memory
systems by exchanging to put it very you
know uh harshly by exchanging
reinforcements we do not understand the
nature of the pattern that's the outcome
of that exchange but we can watch it and
that's what a story is it's our I think
I think that's our our episodic memory
system that picks up images basically
because well we'll get into that your
right hemisphere is good at recognizing
patterns you know and your behaviors
behaviors have patterns obviously that's
why you can predict behaviors they have
patterns one of the ways that we make
those patterns explicit is by making
images of them and then describing the
images and that's basically what a story
does when you read a kid a story
basically what you're doing is you're
using words to activate images of
behaviors and you're trying to you're
trying to instill Behavioral patterns by
doing that anyways you don't understand
the story and that's obvious there's
lots of stories we tell our kids that we
have no we know foggy notion what they
mean fairy tales are like that they know
very peculiar stories but the kids are
interested in them and they'll listen to
them over and over and over and over and
over and that's because there's a lot of
information in those stories like more
than you can possibly imagine all
embedded in those stories and the person
who's listening to it doesn't understand
it and the person who's telling it
doesn't understand
but the information is still transmitted
so which is very peculiar it's very
strange see I started thinking about
that because I was very well when I
started understanding that religious
systems of thought actually had some
meaning that they that the stories they
were telling were accurate then I
couldn't figure out well if they're
accurate how the hell did they develop
if no one understands what they mean
which is impossible right it's like how
do you develop a system of thought in
the absence of any understanding of what
the system means well that seems like a
completely insol
problem it's like well y y pointed out
something similar with dreams he said a
dream will sometimes give you a
premonition of a future State and he
didn't mean that you could interpret the
future by reading your dreams he meant
that the thing that you will become is
in in a sense operative now in its in
its nent form and well that nent form
has more to do with dream structure and
and Imagination than it does with
anything explicit if you can interpret
your dream sometimes you can see where
it is you're headed and again it was the
same mystery how is it that your brain
can know where you're going to be when
you can't even understand what that
means but that's why this multiple
memory System Theory is really useful
because you can say well look at Social
animals for example like a wolf
obviously does not have a declarative
representation of the nature of its
social structure you know it knows who's
what on the dominance hierarchy and it
knows how to behave but it can't
describe its patterns of behavior
they're not conscious meaning they're
not representational they're not
declarative but they're still there and
they're there because they've been
selected for from the darwinian
perspective it's like these patterns of
interaction there's certain patterns of
social interaction that are stable over
time they emerge as a consequence of of
social interactions and they emerge way
before the groups that have the patterns
understand what the patterns are and our
our attempts to spin stories our
descriptions of those patterns of action
before we understand what they are give
you another example of that
say uh people have said that everything
in fre is in Shakespeare but the thing
about about Shakespeare is that nothing
in Shakespeare is explicit is still all
story right he was a great spinner of
drama all Shakespeare's plays plays
which is a reference to behavior all
Shakespeare's plays
are images of patterns of action you can
say what Freud did in so far as you
grant his theorizing Credence is make an
an image of a pattern of behavior
explicit representational from the
perspective of semantics from the
perspective of words
well it's the same with myths I mean
myths are full of wisdom about behavior
that hasn't yet been made
explicit and now the problem with us of
course is that we think well you know
our heads are full of a lot of bizarre
nonsense and that makes it very
difficult for us to figure out what
myths mean and that brings me back to
this this is why I'm telling you this
whole
story 500 years ago the scientific
methodology was for formalized and we
found out very rapidly let me read you
something from Yun he's talking about
the typical attitude of the medieval
individual so this is the Orthodox
Christian medieval individual and you
have to realize that 500 years ago
although in Europe like although there
might have been sectarian differences
within the Christian Community in most
cases you were Christian not because
that's what you believe but because the
world that you lived in was a Christian
World it wasn't like you had 15
different belief systems all of which
were equally coherent to sort of choose
between it was that the world you
inhabited was Christian that was the
explanation of the universe
so anyways Yung
said you know it isn't until cultures
start mixing for example you can't think
like a Muslim if you're a Christian
unless you've met one and if there're
none around well the issue doesn't even
come up so anyways y said how totally
different did the world appeared a
Medievil man for him the Earth was
eternally fixed and that rest in the
center of the universe encircled by the
course of a sun that
Solly bestowed its warmth men were all
children of God under the loving care of
the most high who prepared them for
Eternal blessing bus they all knew
exactly what they should do and how they
should conduct themselves in order to
rise from a corruptible
world to an Incorruptible and joyous
existence such a life no longer seems
real to us even in our dreams Natural
Science has long ago torn this lovely
Veil to shreds well at least you know at
the you know from a fundamental
perspective we know perfectly well that
the Earth is not the center of the
cosmos at least not in the way that it
was conceived from the medieval
perspective you it was very very rapidly
after the scientific methodology became
formulated scientists were generating
observations like mad that seem to exist
in direct conflict with the most
fundamental statements of religious
systems it's like for example the fact
that the sun was at the center of the
well of the universe originally but I
mean we don't even believe that anymore
it's just some you know semi-obscure
star not all that particularly powerful
off in some Backwater corner of one
Galaxy among hundreds of billions of
galaxies in un universe that's so big
that you you can't even comprehend it so
I mean that's a different picture and of
course the logical conclusion to well
this same in the S same sort of thing
happened to Galileo the heavens were
supposed to be perfect from the medieval
perspective whenever planet was supposed
to supposed to have a perfectly circular
orbit even because the circle was the
most perfect of figures and the moon was
supposed to be something that was
completely without blemish since it was
part of the Heavenly order Galileo with
his telescope showed that there were
mountains on the moon and the priests
that he had Ed to demonstrate this to
would even look through the telescope
because for the for reasons that we're
going to discuss as this course
continues but the point is is that very
rapidly after the formalization of the
scientific
methodology our ability to regard Mythic
descriptions of the world as valid was
essentially
destroyed well I
think this is I mean I would like you to
think about this and see if there's
anything wrong with the explanation
because it seems so simple that it's
absurd but I think we made a big mistake
of logic some along now because we made
the presupposition that what we were
doing when we were doing science was the
same thing that we were doing when we
were doing religion and which is to say
that what religion was was an attempt to
describe the world in the same terms or
or or attending to the same phenomena
that we attend to when we're doing
science so then we have the general
attitude that well what religion was at
best was sort of a uh a science with an
abysmally poor methodology based on you
know erratic and unpredict ictable and
biased uh uh observations that were all
designed to produce a given end all the
religious people seem to gra seem to
have uh sort of swallowed that more or
less whole as far as I can tell too
because I mean with obviously these are
generalizations and there are certain
exceptions but people still seem to
believe that whatever it was that
religious religion is doing is the same
thing that science is doing it's just
it's like a different Viewpoint in the
same plane so you get these weird
arguments say between fundamentalist
Christians and evolutionary biologist
um they're talking about different
worlds and and they don't know it on
either side you know so
that I want to tell you at least in part
what the nature of the world that the
myths describe is and how it differs
from the scientific world and like the
basic pre premise of this is that what
myths are concerned about is the world
that you act in that's what it's trying
to describe so myth tells you well
here's how Human Experience is
structured with regards to how you
should act it's not that big a surprise
I mean we know religion is concerned
with morality the morality is the study
of how to act so it doesn't seem like
such a major leap in some regards but it
seems peculiar that people couldn't have
figured
out on a general like in a general sense
that what religions were doing and what
science were doing were were not really
commenor they weren't in the same domain
science is concerned with facts and
religion stories are concerned with
value you know a story has a moral right
that's what you're supposed to derive
from the story you take primitive
stories like as off's fables the morals
made explicit at the end here's the
character is acting out their roles and
here's the behavioral information you're
supposed to derive from that analyze the
story for the moral the moral is in the
light of the behavior which you just
received how it is that how is it that
you should adjust your ongoing Behavior
that's the kind of information that
stories have stories provide you with
information about how to act which is
information about the motivation
significance of things and situations
and when you have a story a good story
about a given situation you know how to
act and knowing how to act inhibits your
anxiety because knowing how to act means
that when you do something you can
predict outcome and as long as there are
predictable outcomes all around you then
you're not
anxious it's knowing how to act it
inhibits your anxiety so I would say
well then it's not much of to me the
presupposition that it's stories that
inhibit your anxiety the fact that none
of us are made anxious by any the other
people in this room is fundamentally
because we share the same story so we
act in predictable
way so when you mess with someone's
story you're messing up the structure
they use to attribute determinant
significance to objects and
situations and
uh you can mess with someone's story
merely by behaving in your own
peculiarly culturally determined way if
you happen to be among foreigners you
don't have to say anything although
words are potent sufficient I mean
perhaps even more more potent than
behaviors but just your mere existence
poses a certain amount of
threat okay
anyways
nii he observed something similar to
what I'm telling you about 100 years ago
he said you know it's kind of peculiar
if you think about it that we've we've
like torn the intellectual foundations
out of Christianity using science but we
all run around acting like Christians
more or less this is his you know I mean
he's talking about Europeans here 100
years ago so this is
peculiar now you might debate and think
to yourself well I don't act like a
Christian or whatever it is that your
particular religious background has to
be but of course you know that's really
quite ridiculous because you did not
invent all your behaviors in fact you
probably invented almost none of them
most of them are copied they're copied
from your parents or from other people
that you met you know from significant
others throughout your whole life and
from books you read and from movies
youve watched and so on and so forth in
so so far as you are inculturated your
behaviors are not your own inventions
and that's the whole purpose of culture
if you had to invent every one of your
behaviors well you'd never get anywhere
so you copy behaviors that have been
accumulated by Humanity over large
periods of time so whether you think you
have a religiously based morality or not
is really not the issue because well you
do human Human Society has been
religious for
like veering or nearing 100% of its
entire developmental history you don't
shake that in 500 years I mean really
you can say well religions have only
been explicitly tumbling down in a sense
if they have been for hundred years see
the rise of big ideological systems to
replace them next I I don't know as far
as I'm concerned a system like communism
or any authoritarian system that's just
that's just an instant replacement
religion anyways n
said when one gives up Christian
belief for example one thereby deprives
oneself of the right to Christian
morality Christianity is a system
consistently thought out and complete
view of things if one breaks out of it a
fundamental idea like the belief in God
for example one thereby breaks the whole
thing to
pieces one is nothing of any consequence
left in one's hands Christianity
presupposes that man does not know
cannot know what is good for him and
what evil he believes in God who alone
knows Christian morality is a command
its origin is
Transcendental it is beyond all
criticism and all right to criticize it
possesses truth only if God is truth it
stands or Falls with the belief in God
if modern westerners really do believe
they know of their own accord
intuitively what is good and
evil if they consequently think they no
longer have need of Christianity as a
guarantee of morality that is merely the
consequence of the ascendant
of Christian
evaluation and an expression of the
strength and depth of this ascendency so
that the origin of modern morality has
been forgotten and the highly
conditional nature of its right to exist
is no longer felt what Michi is
basically saying is
that the fact that you might think that
you can have a morality without a that
we're talking about chrisan morality in
this particular circumstance but it
could be any morality that's derived
from A system that was predicated on the
notion that there was some trans Dental
being the fact that you can think that
you have a morality that will last
without that belief is proof of how
potent that belief system is actually
being it has worked so well and protects
you still so well
that that you can be inconscious
convinced of its lack of
necessity uh I noticed in your footnote
on that here that you said he had
originally said the English yeah um was
he I mean I know this I know this
applies to uh character of uh belief
systems in general but he was referring
was it or or was he to uh the sort of
moral realist
philosophers yeah to because you that
English tradition which I think was
about the same time yeah he was
irritated by attempts to to argue that
morality had a rational basis and that
was in fact derived as a consequence of
rational thought you can just see it
it's right there that's right and and
not only that not only that you can see
it and that it's right there but that
that's how it was originally derived
which to say that reasonable people got
together and rationally decided that
this is how they should conduct their
Affairs now n said look look you look at
the historical record you behave first
then you figure it out and there's huge
like gaps of of of tens of centuries
between figuring out how to behave or
between acting and then later being able
to say how it is that you act so uh he
thought that the English were putting
the cart before the horse in like in
a in an immense man having no vision for
the for the length of historical
development so after that happens and
then you make the cative representations
of it then for instance when a new
person is born and you teach them
declaratively you teach them verbal
stories about their religion for example
um does that get into their behavior I
mean so that then by listening to the
stories about God they actually learn
the behavior the procedural level of how
to act and without believing the ver
yeah well that's a good question I mean
um I don't know exactly what impact
watching stories has on behavior and I
think I think really what watching
stories probably does to you is
reconfigure your conceptions of the
present and the future so that the
motivational significance of things
shifts and that has a consequence on
your behavior although so but you also
have to realize that you know movies and
books and so on portray Heroes and
heroes are mod models for emulation and
a model for emulation is essentially
someone to be imitated so I I don't
think that you can write off the direct
impact of the story on behavior and when
kids play for example when they when
they pretend that there's something what
they're basically doing is embodying an
imaginative representation of a pattern
of action and that's that is what their
play does at least in part so there is
there's some direct effect I think
so okay
get n said look you know we have no
rational reason for having a for
continuing to behave in the way that
we've behaved in the past which is to
essentially adopt judeo-christian
presuppositions in European Society
because we don't believe in the
fundamental we don't believe in the
fundamental premises of the system by
which those moral rules were generated
so you could say well Christianity judeo
Christianity is a tree
a tree of presuppositions and the most
and we live out here in the branches and
the most fundamental presupposition is
that there is a God and if you if you
break the tree at that point then the
whole tree is dead you just don't know
it it might take a long time to die me
she would say and this was basically his
theory for examp that's why people in
the 20th century were so unbelievably
susceptible to rational ideologies like
fascism and communism rationally
described ideologies because well
at well because their Foundation had
been made very unstable by destruction
at this point in their presumption
hierarchy say well this is an an
inhibitory Network in a sense you can
think of it as a methodology for keeping
anxiety under control when this goes
well that whole thing is cast into
doubt the um the grand Inquisitor wasn't
point there that the the trunk of the
was not belie in God but that it had
been captured The Grand inquisitor's
Point was that the foundation of the
society had been captured by the
ging and that the the religious the
spiritual aspect of that became rep
potentiated just under yeah yeah okay
that that's fair enough well that's
something that we'll have to talk about
talk
about yeah well don't I don't want to
answer that right now I'll just answer
it really briefly you could say well the
Bel in God is the belief in two things
one is Authority and the other is
process of adaptation basically and the
priests to the degree that the priests
in dovi story encapsulated this this was
theoretically made
unnecessary say well we'll tell you what
the world is like that's all you need
but you remember in doki's story too the
grand Inquisitor he let Christ out the
back door because that's why that's a
brilliant Story I mean it's the ending
that does it it says well even though
the grand Inquisitor is a fascist
fundamentally he's representative I
think in that story of the Catholic
Church tremendously potent authoritarian
structure with sufficient flexibility to
allow the the active
process some small measure of freedom in
which to
operate what what did you say the
process is called well in doki's Story
the process is Christ in the grand
Inquisitor he's the active spiritual
well yeah he's the active spiritual
process as opposed to the static
structure of the church which is
basically what a government in a sense
it's trying to make things ordered as
ordered as
possible
okay
so anyways as far as I'm concerned we
have a split in our
conscious uh Consciousness and the split
is between what we assume to be true
from the scientific perspective and how
we're willing to govern our actions
because our actions are still governed
by mythological presuppositions that we
no longer presume to be valid we're
still willing to accept them and we also
know that they're useful I mean for
example Western democracy is predicated
on the notion of the natural right the
natural right is a transcendental idea
nobody's been able to pin the damn thing
down I mean what we found is we can't do
without it and at the basis of natural
right is the idea that you know there's
something about you that's more or less
incomprehensible that I have to have
respect for although I can't categorize
it I can't describe it rationally if I
act like it's not there things
immediately go very badly astray the
notion of natural I mean people have
tried to come up with rational
explanations for the natural right but
that's foolish that's foolish because
like every system at the base of every
system is a
presupposition that's because say well
that's because you don't know everything
and because you don't know everything
that means that whatever you do has to
be predicated on some presupposition I
right I mean you have to take a leap of
faith at some point the the
presupposition of the natural right
tree is that there's something valuable
about the
individual and it's once you accept that
that's like a rule of the game we'll
just play that game you're valuable and
I'm valuable we don't know why given
that premise there's a whole bunch of
necessary conclusions those are our the
whole body of our natural rights and you
might say well once you've accepted this
you can
derive
those but you can't provide rational
underpinings for that because that's
just in a sense it's in a sense it's
just an arbitrary decision it's just a
game rule like you want to play the game
if you want to play this particular game
you have to accept that rule I don't
think it's arbitrary actually I think
there's a real reason why that
particular phenomenon emerged like it's
fundamental that's another thing I want
to do in this course sorry I jump all
over but that's like
I want to show you that this
presupposition is not arbitrary that
it's a necessary emergent property of
successful patterns of social
interaction and that even if you wipe it
out it'll pop back up you say you can
say that emphasis on individual worth is
the Hallmark of any society that's uh
properly functioning and stable stable
in the long term and also capable of
updating itself when it's necessary and
then it'll just pop up over and over and
over again of its own accord so that'll
help us get away from the idea that
morality is arbitrary in some sense you
know the old arguments no matter what
moral rule you can think up there's some
Society somewhere on the planet who does
exactly the opposite thing
and people have used that sort of
argumentation to to uh or that sort of
evidence to argue that there's no such
thing as as transcendental morality or
that's a useless
Pursuit n's point was people say that
you know they're willing also to
undermine their own belief systems by
pointing out obvious things like
you know if you shoot a rocket far
enough out in space you're not going to
find heaven and so God's not out there
we still act like our moral systems have
value and they're useful and it really
does appear that acting that way works
so then you have to wonder well if it
works you know what's at the basis of it
and it's really interesting like when I
first started thinking about these ideas
there was still a lot of debate on the
world scene in the sense about how it is
that we should conduct our Affairs you
know at the very least there was two
major sources of or two
major uh B IES of ideas that were in in
like deadlocked competition and one was
authoritarian more or less the
Communists the Communist block they had
a way of they had their Notions of how
to configure the world and then there
was our side and you know we were
basically at each other's throats and
that that was very disturbing to me at
the time but that's sort of all Fallen
apart now with any luck and uh it does
seem that whatever it is that we're
doing in the west seems to work at least
better than anything else anybody can
come up with so n was arguing that this
morality has transcendental Origins you
can't have it if you don't accept the
transcendental Origins you might think
you have it but that's just that just
proves that you don't understand it um
it's also the case that the the this
morality which has transcendental
Origins
works and it also seems to be the case
that its presuppositions are
okay I said I wanted to uh allow some
time for discussion so I just want
to cover two things here
let's look at
this man is concerned with morality and
morality is how to
act n pointed out 100 years ago that
time the fact that there was morality
was a much more ult problem to solve
then which morality was
right I guess in a sense the fact that
there is morality is the question one of
the questions that we're going to be
addressing in this class why is there
morality what does it mean that there is
morality and given that there is
morality is there anything that can be
said about it that's Universal across
morality like see that's another thing
is we know that within different moral
systems there are differences of opinion
about what should be done sort across
moral systems there are differences of
opinions opinion about what should be
done but the fact that there are moral
systems seems to be a universal of human
culture so there's something Universal
in the domain of morality at the level
of analysis that says that every human
culture has a morality but I'm kind of
interested in looking at the meta
structure of the moralities to see if
there's anything that we could pull out
that common to them all because that
would give us some idea about what
morality is and if we want to come to
agreement in the long term about how it
is that we should conduct our Affairs
and so in part lessen our propensity to
engageing social conflict it seems to me
to be reasonable to be useful to be able
to apprehend rationally what the basis
for the fact of morality is and so the
methodology here is well we're going to
look at some neuros pychology because
I'm interested in in what modern
research has to say about the way we
regulate our emotions so that's one
domain of evidence that we're going to
cover the other domain is comparative
mythology that we're going to look at
mythologies from different cultures and
see if we can extract from them what
their Central structure is to see if
there are any commonalities in that
structure so uh that's basically that's
basically the notion
say the the basic issue here is how can
the current state of experience be
conceptualized in abstraction with
regards to its meaning which is to say
well that's what that's what
knowing how to act means what are the
significance of the phenomen that you
currently apprehend say meaning means
implication for Behavioral output
logically therefore myth presents
information relevant to the most
fundamental of moral problems which is
what should be done so that's the
question that stories are trying to
answer how it is that you should how is
it that you should
act the desirable future which is the
object of what should be can only be
conceptualized sorry
can only be conceptualized in
relationship to the present which serves
at least as a necessary point of
contrast and comparison which is to say
well if you think that things should be
a particular way you're always
conceiving that in relationship to the
way that you conceive of them being now
and those two things this is kind of a
peculiar aspect of this form of
cognition is that you evaluate your
present state in terms of your ideal
future but you also evaluate your ideal
future in terms of your present state so
there's a constant interaction going
between the two um that's why poverty
for example is relative in it and I
think it's relative in terms of
socioeconomic effects it's where you are
in the dominance hierarchy that
determines the effect of socioeconomic
status rather than your absolute level
of material well-be this is something
that's really worth considering for
psychologists when they talk about sces
because well to give you one example
like the black community in the US which
is a a population that's frequently uh
studied with regards to the consequences
of low so socioeconomic status as a
population group constitutes the 13th
most wealthy Nation on the planet you
could also say so that's kind of
interesting when you're thinking about
things in absolute terms it's also the
case that even the poorest people in
North American society you know with the
exception of people who've Fallen
completely out of the world have access
to to technologies that 200 years ago
were non-existence and I'm not talking
about computers I'm talking about like
heat and running water so poverty that's
just one example poverty is where you
are construed with respect to where you
could be and there's some obviously
there's some level of absolute poverty
too I mean if you don't get enough to
eat well that brings everything to a
halt but point is is that you can't
conceive of where you are from the
aective perspective without also
conceiving of where you could be and
vice versa um say myths answer the
following stories what is which is what
is the nature of the current state of
experience from the motivational
perspective what should be to what end
should we be moving and how can we get
there well and I I showed you last week
this
figure well that's a story as far as I
can
tell now you want to use your
imagination for a minute say that's not
just a story it's also so a
kingdom what a ridiculous thing to
say you can imagine that there's a
castle wall around that and that what
surrounds it is hostile territory so
that can be viewed as sometimes in
mythologies it's viewed as an ocean
might be one way of looking at it might
be viewed as Barbarian lands or dark
Forest the point is is that out here is
where things that you can't predict take
place and everybody who shares your
story is predictable they live inside
your kingdom everybody out side is
contaminated with chaos basically but
you see why that is is even in this
class is we have a vision of where the
class is going to go both over the
course of the whole semester and just
today you know we have a vision of how
it's going to progress and how we can
how we conceive ourselves in
relationship to all the others in this
class and exactly what's going to happen
and what the plan is and so as far as
we're concerned we compose a unit and
we're a unit because we can predict all
each other's behaviors and we can
predict each other's behaviors because
we all have the same
story that's what a story is
well how does this tie in with mythology
one thing I have't say anything about is
like why do I think this all has
anything to do with mythology it's kind
of a glaring question why you look at
the Christian Viewpoint for example I
say want to map it onto this structure
well Christianity gives you a picture of
man that's what myths do and
Christianity says well what is
man contaminated by Original Sin
that's a hereditary taint it's like you
have it whether you deserve it or not
it's
there in desperate need of
redemption and living in a sea
of chaos and misery basically I mean
this is a pretty negative uh this is a
pretty negative summary but it'll do for
the for the present purposes that's our
present State it's like and we don't
want to trivialize this like the
Christian Perspective basically is look
there's something fundamentally screwed
up with the world human beings do not
fit here really well we're we're we pose
a constant question to ourselves we
don't understand our place in the nature
of things we're always doing things that
we don't understand there's a central
mystery here that we haven't solved it's
not this is not a trivial conception and
people laugh about original sin you know
as if you know what sort of weird
concept concept of that but this says
well there's something about human
beings that we don't understand that
makes them evil well
isn't just lack of of socioeconomic
Goods that's done that that's for sure
well then there's also some image of the
ideal future and that's
Paradise or
heaven or even the Kingdom of Heaven on
Earth so it doesn't have to be something
that's purely spiritual spiritual that
means in a
sense well that means a domain of the
imagination and you can well Paradise is
the archetype of the ideal future which
is to say that whenever you're
committing an action of any sort two act
means to have a plan which means to say
that you are here and you're going to go
here and you have like behavioral
routines to bring that transformation
about say whatever act you undertake has
that structure so you could say well the
collection of acts as a whole has that
structure to act is to adopt the
structure you could say well you
could abstract out from all the
particular Notions of your ideal future
some abstracted meta notion of the ideal
and that would be paradise so that's
well you can see how these myths sort of
get
built the notion that there's some sort
of Ideal that's something that's
inherent to people and you can build
your
ideal well just by imagining what the
best of all possible situations could be
and Christian morality by the way is the
acceptable
procedures by which the unbearable Pres
can be transformed into the ideal future
and if you share that well then you're
part of a community right and a
community means that you're walled in
with all these other people who think
like you and all the Barbarian hordes
and the Discord and the male content and
the unpredictability that's
outside right so that's a story and
while that was a that was a religious
story you say well the Communist story
is like
that and I mean it's pretty outdated
story I guess in many ways the current
situation is characterized by uh
socioeconomic inequality that's a
consequence of class the class struggle
the way uh we can erect a heaven on
Earth by Distributing income and
opportunity equitably we have to undergo
a period of intermediary chaos which
I'll get to later to bring that about
etc etc so you know and one of the
things that's happened to many many many
European communities and this is an
appalling thing is that when their
religious structures collapse the first
thing they do is replace them with like
far more ID political Utopias and as far
as I this has happened in many plac
happened in Russia happened in Germany I
think it happened in China I think it's
happening in Quebec as a as a matter of
fact as
well anyways that's what I think kqu
they lost Roman Catholicism in you know
the late 50s and now they think that if
the political situation was just
transformed that the world would turn
into a Utopia that's what happens when
people lose their religious beliefs so
that's the first thing they do usually
is because there's a big hole there but
okay so that's the that's the simple
story and you can say well there's more
to the story in a sense there's also
transformational grammar and that kind
of looks like this say well it's go
ahead I just wanted to ask you why why
you chose to call the present unbearable
I mean that seems to have such a strong
you know implies a really strong aect
instead of like imperfect or yeah well
it's just a uh what do you say it's kind
of satirical I guess I mean you're
always trying to change it no matter
what it is look I'll give you an example
okay really quickly I read this really
funny story in uh the Atlantic magazine
the other week and I hated liking it
because but anyways I did like it it was
kind of funny but um so this guy he's a
travel riter and he goes on one of these
cruises and uh everything's done for him
absolutely everything like if he goes
goes swimming in the in the morning and
he sits down on his beach chair he gets
a towel there's a guy there that's hired
just to make sure he has a towel and if
he gets up to walk around the pool the
same guy's job is to go and get his
towel and replace it with another one I
mean he doesn't have to do anything he
said he could eat at the restaurant 18
times a day and if he didn't feel like
walking up to the restaurant he could
call room service and get whatever he
wanted and it would be there in 10
minutes all right and he said for the
first 3 or 4 days he was really guilty
about this like he couldn't stand the
fact that well it's often U people from
the third world often man these ships by
the way because they'll work cheap and
anyways he was real guilty about having
being weighted on hand and foot
basically and so for the first 2 or 3
days he was sort of racked by guilt but
by the end he said and this is quite
funny he said by the end of the trip
having adjusted to his new
circumstances he was Finding himself
increasingly irritated by the fact that
when he called for room service and they
brought him a sandwich they always put
it too close to the little decorative
orange slice and the edge of it got
soggy so anyways see it's very funny you
know that's what people are like is you
know you adjust to sort of your your
expectations adjust to match the
situation and then you construe the
motivational significance of events with
regards to that that conceptualization
well so that's kind of why I put that
it's like for him the unbearable present
was the fact that you know the corner of
his sandwich was soggy and he was really
irritated at himself for for reacting in
this manner but he said well that's just
what people are like is that when you're
when your set of expectations Alters the
veilance of phenomena instantly changes
and that's why the Buddhist in part
think the world is Mayas right you just
generate a story about what should
happen you can switch the veilance of
phenomena virtually virtually at will
but not entirely will I mean there's
still certain constraints
so you're always trying to run from this
and sense to get to this it doesn't
matter what your situation is and this
is permanent like that thing just moves
more or less with you wherever you move
so uh that's the simple story and then
there's the more complex story which
we'll talk about it in detail
and so you have this that's the known
you know that's an
ideology for
example well if something interferes
with one of your plans something
unexpected happens you just switch to
another plan all right but if something
interferes with a more fundamental
presupposition like who you are where
you're going then this whole thing can
come crumbling down and that's
represented here and this is
transformational a transformational
grammar in a sense I guess how
conception a can turn it to conception B
which is to say that people's belief
systems will shift radically so you also
need a structure for
uh you have a belief system that's one
thing and you need one but you also need
a process by which your belief system is
updated because your belief system is
supposed to map the environment the
environment keeps changing and now and
then you have to undergo a fundamental
revolution in your beliefs and that's
basically what this is pointing out is
that you have a well you know the
example I give you'll read about it in
in detail it's like first of all there's
a little story in that in this in the
book about this guy who's he going to a
meeting and he's going to be a real star
at this meeting and his elevator's late
so he thinks he's going to be late and
the fact that the elevator's late is
really distressing him because he's
construing the significance of that with
relationship to his meeting so that
makes him mad and then he's down he goes
out the front of the building and now
he's kind of late for his meeting it's a
few blocks
like anybody who gets in his way makes a
Ms like little old ladies or lovers over
for a stroll or whatever he constr their
existence with regards to his plans so
if he had lots of time well they
wouldn't bother him at all but the fact
that he's late makes him a ball of
irritation so
anyways when when the elevator doesn't
show up he has to shift plans he goes
down the stairs instead well that's a
minor league irritation well say when he
gets back he's done with his meeting and
his boss calls him into the office and
says uh
you're fired you're incompetent you're
the worst employee we've ever had well
he had visions of being a star in his
head was evaluate a everything with
regards to that still being quite
irritated about the fact say the
elevator wouldn't show up but now
something's really M happened to him
that's a major league discrepancy you
know it's it's blown out a few
fundamental prositions it's knocked out
his version of the of who he is and what
he's doing and of where he's going it's
blown in the whole structure he uses to
interpret the motivational signific ific
of phenomena and that means that an
event that's not emotionally neutral has
taken place it's it's an event that has
a tremendous amount of emotional
significance he's very anxious and he's
very depressed it's like you could say
in a sense and we'll try to outline this
in more details his motivational systems
are no longer regulated he doesn't know
what anything means anymore and when you
don't know what anything means
everything makes you anxious that's a
problem that's what this represents so
he's down here everything's gone chaotic
he said I don't know who I am anymore
and that happens to people you know then
you have to reevaluate your whole past
and your present and your future your
whole story shifts everything changes
and maybe you can do that or maybe you
cut your throat because that happens to
people too when everything falls down
they just can't handle it they're
overwhelmed by their negative emotions
and that kills them that's the end of
them well let's say he pops back out of
it he's a little bit more humble This
Time figures out maybe he didn't like
his goddamn job anyways he should have
done something he wanted to do a long
time ago he maybe wouldn't have been
such a bastard and got fired in the
first place
says his conceptions of who he is and
what he wants to be have
changed his emotions are re-regulated he
interprets the world from a slightly
different perspective but the meta
structure of the perspective is still
the same right he was here in this kind
of structure when he was there he's
still in this kind of structure here
it's just that the contents of the
structure are different so there's a
stability well there's a stability in
structure as well as flexibility for
change within the structure
this is the big mythological Story by
the way says uh you can look at this all
sorts of ways I'll try to diagram this
out later these are
castles kingdoms say this is a dominance
hierarchy that's we'll discuss that in
in some detail later it's like if you're
in a corporation for example you share a
dream with everybody in the corporation
and you arrange yourself in a power
hierarchy to attain the goals of the
corporation and to get from here to here
you move up the dominance hierarchy and
it's in your best interest under those
circumstances keep the corporation going
and also to prop yourself up the levels
of the dominance hierarchy so there's a
dominance hierarchy in here in the king
of the dominance hierarchy maybe he's
the CEO or whatever he's a he's the
active representative of the ideal
future which makes him the king
basically from the mythological
perspective anyways so that's a
community this is a
dragon that's that's one way of looking
at a dragon is something that lives in
the cave and it's very dangerous but it
sits on something very promising it has
a hord of treasure and uh
dragons are the places that uh anomalous
events emerge from say they're
representations of the chaos that
surrounds predictable territory the
thing about chaos is that it's
threatening and promising at the same
time now in in those um little circles
it says that the Adaptive behavior is a
planned sequence of adaptive Behavior
yeah now and it seems that you've
presented that the majority of our
behavior is not able to be planned or
formulated declaratively yeah do unpl
adapted Behavior behaviors fall inside
the little circles or in the meta all I
meant really by planned is that like you
draw on your reservoir of Habitual
behaviors to and put them into play to
attain certain ends so it's like even
the guy rushing to the meeting he
doesn't have to think about how to walk
like that's a those sequences of
behaviors are already habitual he just
says well the plan is I will walk there
so that that's all I meant by that is
that you just have like your
conceptualization of your present state
is somewh General and so is your
conceptualization of your ideal future
but you have specific
plans to move you from one state to
another and you can shift between them
like I said this is a simplistic
Viewpoint of that structure we'll look
at the real structure that much later in
the course but that's all I mean by it's
just those are sub routines that will
enable you to pursue your goal that's
all so what if you're doing something
that is an Adaptive Behavior it's not
something like walking it's something
like trying to make a good impression on
but what if what if you're taking some
sort of mythical knowledge that you've
gotten about how to behave to make
things work out but you can't formulate
that as a plan and and you have this
goal and this is how you're getting
there but you you haven't planned to get
there that way you're just trying to get
there the whole point of psycho analysis
is that you can have plans that you
don't have a representation of right I
mean isn't that not only plans but even
representations of the ideal right
absolutely yeah well depends on your
their level of representation so you can
have fantasies that you haven't made
explicit like this by the way I think
this this this is a fantasy and so is
this it's the fantasies that guide your
that guide your motivational that guide
your motivational uh your motivational
judgments your dreams about the future
um if you don't know what you're doing
then you engage in exploratory Behavior
you know so you say well I have this
ideal future in mind but I don't know
how to get there then you try out
different patterns and just something
we'll discuss next week actually so
that's a that's a default position I
know where I want to go but I don't know
how to get there so since I don't know
how to since I don't know what to do
what can I do that's a paradoxical
question but the answer is you know the
answer to that is you start engaging in
exploratory behaviors of various sorts
to make what you want to happen start
happening so that's that's so things
things that you do know how to do that
you don't know you know how to do they
just fall inside that little BL up like
things that you're doing without being
aware or planning to do them that way
but you're doing them because you learn
well they would form sub routines of
this basically so you you like you You'
use what you know how to do
automatically in your attempt to do what
what it is that you want to accomplish
like walking or moving your hands or
whatever you you sequence those
behaviors that you already know how to
do so um in describing the first Circle
you you basically described uh like a I
mean a kingdom right with an
authoritarian uh Rule and whatever yeah
uh are you going to go into in during
the class what what kind works best
because uh you've also described
elsewhere what I don't remember uh how
how the Democracy works and how it's not
there isn't a general generalized
hierarchy but but people have a
hierarchy in their certain
specializations ET yeah yeah well you
know we're still doing really
introductory introductory work we will
go into that yeah absolutely yeah
because what I want to do is find
out well
this is the myth of the way by the way
this is the that's what I set up there
it's this story that myths refer to most
particularly is the structure of
adaptive structures and how they
transform and when the myth is when myth
is describing the world that's what it's
describing he said well this is from the
mythological perspective the world is
constructed of the distinction between
Chaos and Order it's like before Chaos
and Order are divided you don't have
anything and you can say well this is
chaos and this is order but order is
also something that has to transform
because anything orderly that doesn't
change dies because wow it's hard to say
exactly why that is because things
change and you have to keep up with them
is the simple answer I have no idea why
that is it just is the case so the
mythical world is the world that's
always stable which is to say there's an
unknown that's chaos it has a certain
effect of veilance which is frightening
and promising that's always there the
unknown and then there's the known
that's your culture that's the story you
share with everyone that's your
procedures to bring about what you want
to bring about that's your kingdom
that's always there and then there's a
process that mediates between the two
that's you that's always there those are
the three constituent elements of the
world chaos order and and the hero
actually although those those all have
they're split into positive and negative
representations in mythology as well so
that's the mythological world so and
it's as far as I can tell it's a partic
it's a completely Co internally coherent
representation of experience and it
includes it concentrates on affective
veillance and motivational significance
rather than on sensory structure
so what sort of things would affect the
content of the new adaptive
structure okay what what do you mean by
what sorts of things well what what
would influence a particular shape that
it takes particular story that it tells
well hopefully past
experience I mean these are like these
are fantasies but to the degree that
someone's healthy there're fantasies
that are constructed on knowledge that's
generated as a consequence of past
Endeavors so let's say like you're doing
something and you fail in a major way in
an unexpected way well hopefully what
happens that basically means that
there's a bunch of information about
your circumstance that you failed to
either notice or to adapt to that's what
it means if a failure comes as a big
surprise as a general rule you're not
paying attention so hopefully what
happens when this is reconstructed
that's why it's sort of on plane is that
all the anomalous information that you
didn't take into account probably
because it was threatening is now
Incorporated in here so hopefully that
sounds like Coon's yeah that is exactly
that what what was describing
look that's normal science right yeah
and that's revolutionary science but see
what found basically was this
structure in science but what found
was only a sub structure of a much
broader process of
adaptation but it's like a Mythic
structure of science then yeah well I
mean what what was describing is
how cognitive systems stabilize and
restructure but in the scientific domain
but you could just say well cognitive
systems stabilize and
restructure no matter what we're
applying them to so kunite now Co this
is a very strange Quirk of History
because Yung said this like in 19 both
1930 said uh this is how religious
systems progress and I can't for reasons
I cannot understand no one seemed to
notice that and then said it 1962
or 61 this how scientific systems
transform and it was like it was a
revelation but anyways who
knows it's easier for people to accept
and understand probably in the
scientific domain because we feel that
we understand that type of knowledge and
we do because the rules are are explicit
it's harder to understand how this works
when you're talking about veilance
but the thing you have to remember it's
like I'm trying to I'm trying to make
this argument as as uh concrete as
possible you have to map valances you
have to because you have to know how to
behave and you have to get what you need
out of the world and
uh we have structure for doing that it's
it's of primary importance that's what
we do while we're alive and everything
else is just an adjunct to that so when
you're looking at this sort of thing
you're looking at the most fundamental
aspects of cognition as far as I can
tell
and you're you're basically the purpose
of cognition as far as I can tell is to
regulate emotion that's why we have it
that's what it's good for we want to not
be in pain we want to not be anxious we
want to have a future that's full of
Hope and and satisfaction and we're
always trying to adjust our models of
the world hopefully to ensure that that
occurs and when we do more specific
cognitive exercises like science well
that's a subp specialization very useful
hopefully it's very useful it's
dangerous
too other
questions you mean to say that the
second is more adapted than the first
well hopefully it doesn't have to I mean
it doesn't have to be Yun described
something that he called retro
regressive reestablishment of the
Persona which is you're trying to do
something and you fail and when you
reorganize yourself your sphere of
attempts is much more constricted so
like you can get worse as a consequence
of this if you just cuz all that
anomalous information that you haven't
processed you can't just let that in it
it doesn't change you by letting it in
you have to adjust your behavior to the
anomalous territory and that takes a lot
of well a lot of Ingenuity a lot of hard
work and that's why Freud you know Freud
found by the end of his life he said
well mere Consciousness doesn't entail
cure well that's because just knowing
that something there isn't the trick the
trick is if there's a threat that the
environment poses like let's say people
find you obnoxious that might generally
well and that isn't what you want it's
interfering with your your future well
the problem just knowing that people
find you obnoxious that's not that
useful the to assimilate that
information is to take it in and move
differently and respond differently so
that other people are no longer
that category of things that's hostile
towards you so it's not it's not just
heightened Consciousness it's like total
reconstruction of your behavioral
outputs you have to learn to pay
attention and to listen and to and to
have some respect for somebody else's
story and so the new system also depends
on what's available right I that's why
you can regress because your past is
available that's why people are so
susceptible to ideologies just because
it's around yes that's true it's easy to
saying it's about ease so what's there
is what you CR on a lot of the yeah yeah
that's true too well that's why how
brainwashing institutes basically work
you know they toss anomalous information
at you until you crack and then they
throw a new system at you which you grab
onto immediately the Koreans did that
very effectively to American prisoners
of war in the
50s so that's and I mean it's not just
that's how the Army works so
fraternities work in in a in a a more
minimal sense
uh that's how initiation ceremonies work
so it's not always negative that that
that op I mean it's it's only negative
if what you're handed is less useful
than what you had so or less useful than
what you could have constructed
yourself okay
so I know that was sort of
rambl any other questions
um what's the process of coming up with
the whole system like that does that
imply that you should have power over it
or that it's it's
exploration what I mean the whole
process of coming up with a system like
this are you where are you by doing this
in the system you how conscious of it
you're
here you're the thing that moves from
here to
here but I mean if you're the person who
comes up with this system yeah it out
like that that's right that's right
that's why the way is the proper path of
life from the mythological perspective
and to identify with the way is instead
of identifying with this or with this
knowing that they're temporary is to
identify with this because it's the only
thing that's constant across the
constant span so you say well there is
known territory and there's unknown
territory and there's the process by
which one is generated out of the other
and you said well where does the
individual fit basically where are you
well if you're doing this voluntarily
then you're identifying with the process
by which cultural information is
generated rather than with the
information itself so that makes you
always on the always in the proper local
so to speak to construct the world
that's where all the that's where all
the interesting occurrences take place
that's a proper place to live I'll get
i'll close with an example of that say
well here's another symbol that you're
all familiar
with that that's da and da means two
things it either means the way depending
on the translation the way which is that
or it means
meaning so to live in Dow is to live in
meaning and this symbol is a symbol of
the totality of the world and why is
that well it's because this is chaos and
and that's usually given a feminine
connotation for reasons that we'll
discuss later and this is
order and it's chaos and it's the split
between Chaos and Order and the mutual
coexistence that makes the
world
and this dot is black because anything
orderly can immediately be turned into
chaos more or less unpredictably and
sometimes by your own efforts and Chaos
can also be turned into order that's why
this little Do's white also by your own
efforts exploration does that and da the
man who lives in da lives on this
line with one foot in order and one foot
in chaos and the reason for that see
that's where all the interesting things
are happening that's where the
information is Flowing if you're all
here you predict everything well that's
secure but it's boring and it's not just
boring symbolically it defines boring
there's no new information happening
here and if you're here well you're so
overwhelmed with new information that
that you can't do anything with it you
want to be here and if you're here then
you're doing this you're paying
attention to anomalous information
always you're allowing that to
destabilize this structure when it's
necessary you have to do this that's the
hero in the belly of the Beast by the
way or the Sun that hacks its way out of
the dragon at night and back
up so that's the path of the hero and in
ter terms of systems that are stable
over time and authoritarian system says
this is not necessary so it decays as
things change a system that's properly
balanced said well we need
this but we also need this and therefore
we're going to have to allow a certain
amount of disorder into the system so
that flexibility can be
maintained so and the the the trick is
balance it's like too much
novelty everything
degenerates too much order everything
petrifies you want to be right on the
proper Edge and the way that you can
tell you're on the edge when you're
interested in something that's that's
the sign that says you say well there's
an affective sign post that tells you
when you're here if you're here you're
interested if you're here you're
terrified if you're here you're bored
you want to be right in the middle of
that and then but that means your brain
is on and it's optimal in in an optimal
manner because your sensory systems are
properly heightened because you're a
little bit anxious you're doing a lot of
exploration we find that pleasurable
like that's left frontal activation
people like that that's incentive reward
pleasure that's what cocaine does to you
says when you're here you're
on it's analgesic too which is kind of
interesting is that like flow yeah ex
not quite though because the problem
with things like flow and this is Joseph
Campbell's thing too is they're always
talking about following your happiness
this is not right
to get here what you have to do is look
at things that you
hate problem is no one will buy a book
that tells them
that it's flow no but this is a ma this
is a major problem U problem with new
age philosophy in
general it's the anomaly that you have
to face and the a priority motivational
significance of an anomal is
Terror cuz otherwise people would be in
flow all the time and they're not
did you get this sign yet yeah
sure I think I
yeah okay book's
expensive okay that's fine that's fine
it is a good
book yeah